README.md, before:

# Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots

Each folder in this repository contains the scripts required to recreate the analyses and plots for the main figures from the manuscript "Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots Identifies a Role for RUNX1 in Down Syndrome DNA Methylation Profiles". 

## Scripts

- `DMR_node.sh`: Example of how to perform multiple DM.R runs in parallel on a login node. 

- `Figure 1`: Distinct DS methylome profiles.
	- `cnvPlot.R`: Plot of chromosome 21 copy number using output from [CNV_Me](https://github.com/hyeyeon-hwang/CNV_Me).
	- `global.R`: Process all samples for equal CpG coverage and smooth, test for global methylation differences, and create a single CpG density plot.
	- `heatmapUpdate.R`: Update DMRichR heatmaps from multiple comparisons to have a consistent style.
	
- `Figure 2`: Gene Ontology enrichments.
	- `GOplot.R`: Slim and compare GOfuncR terms from one comparison to other comparisons.
	
- `Figure 3`: Consensus DMR profiles.
	- `consensusDMRs.sh`: Create a consensus DMR profile from multiple comparisons for consensusPCA.R.
	- `ConsensusPCA.R`: PCA of all samples using consensus DMRs.
	- `machineLearning.R`: DMR machine learning feature selection analysis and heatmap.
	- `venn.R`: Create an area-proportional Venn diagram based on overlaps of genomic coordinates from multiple comparisons.
	
- `Figure 4`: Divergent DNA hyper- and hypo-methylation profiles.
	- `chromatinPlots.R`: Parsing and summary heatmaps for multiple LOLA chromHMM and Roadmap enrichment analyses from multiple comparisons.
	- `panTissue`: The scripts and annotation files for the Down Syndrome pan-tissue meta-analysis that utilizes [GAT](https://github.com/AndreasHeger/gat).
		- `annotations`: Folder with bed files for testing. References are in the manuscript.
		- `both`: Folder with GAT script and plotting script for each individual comparison.
		- `hyper_hypo`: Folder with GAT script and plotting script for each individual comparison split by hypermethylation and hypomethylation.
		- `panTissuePlot.R`: Plot of the analyses results for all comparisons from `runs_DS_GAT.sh`.
		- `run_DS_GAT.sh`: Main script for parallel runs of the Down syndrome pan-tissue meta-analysis for all comparisons. 

- `Figure 5`: RUNX1 profile.
	- `blockPlot`
		- `consensusBlocks.sh`: Create a consensus block profile from multiple comparisons for `RUNX1_blockPlot.R`.
		- `RUNX1_blockPlot.R`: Plot the RUNX1 consensus block using all samples.
	- `ChIP-seq_integration`:
		- `mmc3.xlsx`: RUNX1 ChIP-seq peaks. Reference is in the manuscript.
		- `RUNX1_ChIP_Overlap.R`: Analysis and plot of integration of WGBS data with RUNX1 ChIP-seq data.
	- `Transcription_Factor_Analysis`
		- `homer.sh`: Parallel HOMER known transcription factor motif analyses for multiple DMRichR comparisons.
		- `marge.R`: Parsing and summary heatmap for multiple DMR HOMER comparisons using MARGE.
		
## Reference

If you modify this code and utilize it please cite the publication:

Laufer BI, Hwang H, Jianu JM, Mordaunt CE, Korf IF, Hertz-Picciotto I, LaSalle JM. Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots Identifies a Role for RUNX1 in Down Syndrome DNA Methylation Profiles. *bioRxiv* preprint. **doi**: [10.1101/2020.06.18.157693](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.157693)

## Acknowledgements

The development of these scripts was suppourted by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) postdoctoral fellowship [MFE-146824] and a [CIHR Banting postdoctoral fellowship](https://banting.fellowships-bourses.gc.ca/en/2018-2019-eng.html) [BPF-162684].  We would also like to thank [Matt Settles](https://github.com/msettles) for invaluable discussions related to some of the bioinformatic approaches utilized in this repository.

Commit message:

Added histone modification index and tidied documentation

README.md, after:

# Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots

Each folder in this repository contains the scripts required to recreate the analyses and plots for the main figures from the manuscript "Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots Identifies a Role for RUNX1 in Down Syndrome DNA Methylation Profiles". 

## Scripts

- `DMR_node.sh`: Example of how to perform multiple DM.R runs in parallel on a login node. 

- `Figure 1`: Distinct DS methylome profiles.
	- `cnvPlot.R`: Plot of chromosome 21 copy number using output from [CNV_Me](https://github.com/hyeyeon-hwang/CNV_Me).
	- `global.R`: Process all samples for equal CpG coverage and smooth, test for global methylation differences, and create a single CpG density plot.
	- `heatmapUpdate.R`: Update DMRichR heatmaps from multiple comparisons to have a consistent style.
	
- `Figure 2`: Gene Ontology enrichments.
	- `GOplot.R`: Slim and compare GOfuncR terms from one comparison to other comparisons.
	
- `Figure 3`: Consensus DMR profiles.
	- `consensusDMRs.sh`: Create a consensus DMR profile from multiple comparisons for `consensusPCA.R`.
	- `ConsensusPCA.R`: PCA of all samples using consensus DMRs.
	- `machineLearning.R`: DMR machine learning feature selection analysis and heatmap.
	- `venn.R`: Create an area-proportional Venn diagram based on overlaps of genomic coordinates from multiple comparisons.
	
- `Figure 4`: Divergent DNA hyper- and hypo-methylation profiles.
	- `chromatinPlots`: Parsing and plots for Roadmap epigenomics chromHMM core 15-state model and 5 core histone modifications from 127 reference epigenomes.
		- `chromatinPlots.R`: Parsing and summary heatmaps for multiple LOLA chromHMM and core histone modification enrichment analyses from multiple comparisons.
		- `roadmap_epigenomics_index.txt`: The index file of histone modifications needed by `chromatinPlots.R`.
	- `panTissue`: The scripts and annotation files for the Down Syndrome pan-tissue meta-analysis that utilizes [GAT](https://github.com/AndreasHeger/gat).
		- `annotations`: Folder with bed files for testing. References are in the manuscript.
		- `both`: Folder with GAT script and plotting script for each individual comparison.
		- `hyper_hypo`: Folder with GAT script and plotting script for each individual comparison split by hypermethylation and hypomethylation.
		- `panTissuePlot.R`: Plot of the analyses results for all comparisons from `runs_DS_GAT.sh`.
		- `run_DS_GAT.sh`: Main script for parallel runs of the Down syndrome pan-tissue meta-analysis for all comparisons. 

- `Figure 5`: RUNX1 profile.
	- `blockPlot`
		- `consensusBlocks.sh`: Create a consensus block profile from multiple comparisons for `RUNX1_blockPlot.R`.
		- `RUNX1_blockPlot.R`: Plot the RUNX1 consensus block using all samples.
	- `ChIP-seq_integration`:
		- `mmc3.xlsx`: RUNX1 ChIP-seq peaks. Reference is in the manuscript.
		- `RUNX1_ChIP_Overlap.R`: Analysis and plot of integration of WGBS data with RUNX1 ChIP-seq data.
	- `Transcription_Factor_Analysis`
		- `homer.sh`: Parallel HOMER known transcription factor motif analyses for multiple comparisons.
		- `marge.R`: Parsing and summary heatmap for HOMER analyses of multiple comparisons using MARGE.
		
## Reference

If you modify this code and utilize it please cite the publication:

Laufer BI, Hwang H, Jianu JM, Mordaunt CE, Korf IF, Hertz-Picciotto I, LaSalle JM. Low-Pass Whole Genome Bisulfite Sequencing of Neonatal Dried Blood Spots Identifies a Role for RUNX1 in Down Syndrome DNA Methylation Profiles. *bioRxiv* preprint. **doi**: [10.1101/2020.06.18.157693](https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.06.18.157693)

## Acknowledgements

The development of these scripts was suppourted by a Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) postdoctoral fellowship [MFE-146824] and a [CIHR Banting postdoctoral fellowship](https://banting.fellowships-bourses.gc.ca/en/2018-2019-eng.html) [BPF-162684].  We would also like to thank [Matt Settles](https://github.com/msettles) for invaluable discussions related to some of the bioinformatic approaches utilized in this repository.
